module-1/lab-intro-pandas/README.md, before:

![Ironhack logo](https://i.imgur.com/1QgrNNw.png)

# Lab | Introduction to Pandas

## Introduction

In the Introduction to Pandas lesson, we learned about the two main data structures in Pandas (Series and DataFrames), how to work with them, how to obtain them from other data structures, and how to perform basic calculations with them.

The goal of this lab is to help you practice the concepts you learned in the lesson and provide you with some hands-on experience working with Pandas.

## Getting Started

Open the `main.ipynb` file in the `your-code` directory. There are a bunch of questions to be solved. If you get stuck in one exercise you can skip to the next one. Read each instruction carefully and provide your answer beneath it.

## Deliverables

- `main.ipynb` with your responses to each of the exercises.

## Submission

Upon completion, add your deliverables to git. Then commit git and push your branch to the remote.

## Resources

- [Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/)
- [Intro to Pandas Data Structures](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/dsintro.html)
- [Descriptive Statistics for Pandas DataFrame](https://chrisalbon.com/python/data_wrangling/pandas_dataframe_descriptive_stats/)

Commit message:

Adding snippet about Jupyter Notebook

module-1/lab-intro-pandas/README.md, after:

![Ironhack logo](https://i.imgur.com/1QgrNNw.png)

# Lab | Introduction to Pandas

## Introduction

In the Introduction to Pandas lesson, we learned about the two main data structures in Pandas (Series and DataFrames), how to work with them, how to obtain them from other data structures, and how to perform basic calculations with them.

The goal of this lab is to help you practice the concepts you learned in the lesson and provide you with some hands-on experience working with Pandas.

**Note:** This will be the first lab in which we will use Jupyter Notebooks to submit your work. In order to complete this lab (and other Python labs going forward), you should start Jupyter Notebook and open the appropriate `main.ipynb` file for the lab you are completing.

## Getting Started

Open the `main.ipynb` file in the `your-code` directory. There are a bunch of questions to be solved. If you get stuck in one exercise you can skip to the next one. Read each instruction carefully and provide your answer beneath it.

## Deliverables

- `main.ipynb` with your responses to each of the exercises.

## Submission

Upon completion, add your deliverables to git. Then commit git and push your branch to the remote.

## Resources

- [Pandas Documentation](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/)
- [Intro to Pandas Data Structures](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/dsintro.html)
- [Descriptive Statistics for Pandas DataFrame](https://chrisalbon.com/python/data_wrangling/pandas_dataframe_descriptive_stats/)
