module-2/lab-discrete-probability-distribution/README.md, before:


![Ironhack logo](https://i.imgur.com/1QgrNNw.png)

# Lab | Probability Distributions


## Introduction

As a data anaylist, you might need to use probability distribution for several reasons: 
- To analyze data to find useful patterns
- To make better data-driven decisions by anwering questions like 'how likely it is that an observation of a random variable occurs'

## Getting Started

Open the `main.ipynb` file in the `your-code` directory. There are 3 exercises and in each exercise you will work with 3 different datasets. The datasets are in the same directory. Please keep in mind that you might also need to use some of the functions you saw in the previous lessons. Remember there is a common thread!! 

## Deliverables

- `main.ipynb` with your responses.

## Submission

Upon completion, add your deliverables to git. Then commit git and push your branch to the remote.

## Resources

[Scipy module Stats](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/stats.html)

[Probability distribution cheat sheet](http://blog.cloudera.com/blog/2015/12/common-probability-distributions-the-data-scientists-crib-sheet/)

[Poisson Distribution: Predict the score in soccer betting](https://www.pinnacle.com/en/betting-articles/Soccer/how-to-calculate-poisson-distribution/MD62MLXUMKMXZ6A8)

[scipy.stats.poisson](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.poisson.html)

Commit message:

Changes made to Readme.md and Lab Discrete Distribution

module-2/lab-discrete-probability-distribution/README.md, after:


![Ironhack logo](https://i.imgur.com/1QgrNNw.png)

# Lab | Discrete Probability Distributions


## Introduction

As a data analyst, you might need to use probability distribution for several reasons: 
- To analyze data to find useful patterns
- To make better data-driven decisions by answering questions like 'how likely it is that an observation of a random variable occurs'

## Getting Started

Open the `Lab Discrete Probability Distribution.ipynb` file in the `your-code` directory. There are exercises on Bernoulli's, binomial, and poisson distributions. In each exercise please read the question carefully and provide your solutions below the question. All the calculations must be performed using Python. Also please keep in mind that you might also need to use some of the functions you saw in the previous lessons. Please refer the notes. 
Happy Learning!!

## Deliverables

- `Lab Discrete Probability Distribution.ipynbb` with your responses.

## Submission

Upon completion, add your deliverables to git. Then commit git and push your branch to the remote.

## Other Resources

[Scipy module Stats](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/stats.html)

[Probability distribution cheat sheet](http://blog.cloudera.com/blog/2015/12/common-probability-distributions-the-data-scientists-crib-sheet/)

[Poisson Distribution: Predict the score in soccer betting](https://www.pinnacle.com/en/betting-articles/Soccer/how-to-calculate-poisson-distribution/MD62MLXUMKMXZ6A8)

[scipy.stats.poisson](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.stats.poisson.html)
